DECEMBER 20, 1973,
MADRID, SPAIN.
AT AROUND 9:25 A.M.
AN OFFICIAL CAR IS MAKING
ITS WAY THROUGH THE
STREETS OF MADRID,
THE SPANISH CAPITAL.
SUDDENLY THERE'S A
MASSIVE EXPLOSION.
THE CAR IS FLUNG
HIGH INTO THE AIR.
THE THREE OCCUPANTS
ARE KILLED INSTANTLY.
ONE OF THEM IS SPAIN'S
PRIME MINISTER,
ADMIRAL LUIS
CARRERO BLANCO.
BUT WHO WOULD WANT
HIM DEAD, AND WHY?
♪
DECEMBER 20, 1973,
MADRID, SPAIN.
THE SPANISH PRIME
MINISTER, ADMIRAL LUIS
CARRERO BLANCO HAS JUST
BEEN KILLED BY A BOMB
HIDDEN IN A TUNNEL
UNDER THE ROAD.
THE FORCE OF THE
EXPLOSION WAS SO GREAT
THAT HIS CAR WAS
HELD OVER THE TOP
OF AN ADJACENT FIVE
STORY BUILDING.
IT WILL BE TWO DAYS
BEFORE ANYONE ADMITS
RESPONSIBILITY FOR
THE ASSASSINATION.
THEN A GROUP KNOWN AS ETA,
FROM THE BASQUE REGION
IN NORTHERN SPAIN, STEPS
FORWARD CLAIMING THEY
KILLED BLANCO BECAUSE OF
HIS UNSWERVING SUPPORT
FOR SPAIN'S AGING
FASCIST DICTATOR
GENERAL
FRANCISCO FRANCO.
EVEN THOUGH HE WAS 70
YEARS OLD AT THE TIME,
BLANCO HAD BEEN NAMED AS
FRANCO'S CHOSEN SUCCESSOR
AND ETA KNEW HE WOULD
CONTINUE TO IMPLEMENT
FRANCO'S HARDLINE POLICIES
SO HE'S MARKED FOR DEATH.
FRANCO WOULD DIE HIMSELF
TWO YEARS LATER,
BUT IT WOULD
MAKE NO DIFFERENCE
TO ETA'S WAR OF TERROR
AGAINST THE SPANISH STATE.
THEY CONTINUE WITH
THEIR VIOLENT CAMPAIGN
OF BOMBING
AND ASSASSINATION,
RESULTING OVER THE YEARS
IN HUNDREDS OF DEATHS.
ALONG THE WAY MANY ETA
MEMBERS THEMSELVES WILL DIE
- EITHER IN SHOOTOUTS
WITH THE AUTHORITIES
OR IN FRONT OF
JUDICIAL FIRING SQUADS.
BUT NONE OF THIS
MATTERS TO THEM.
THEY'RE DETERMINED
TO FORCE SPAIN
TO RECOGNIZE
THEIR RIGHT TO AN
INDEPENDENT HOMELAND
OF THEIR OWN.
ETA, WHO'S FULL NAME IS
EUSKADI TA ASKATASUNA,
MEANING "BASQUE HOMELAND
AND FREEDOM", IS AN
EXTREME NATIONALIST GROUP
DEDICATED TO FREEING THE
BASQUE REGION IN NORTHERN
SPAIN FROM SPANISH RULE.
THE BASQUE'S ANCESTORAL
HOMELAND STRETCHES INLAND
FROM THE BAY OF BISCAY AND
CONSISTS OF THE PROVINCES
OF VIZCAYA, GUIPUZCOA,
NAVARRA AND ALAVA.
IT ALSO OCCUPIES A SMALL
PART OF SOUTHWEST FRANCE,
NAMELY THE PROVINCES OF
LABOURD, BASSE NAVARRE
AND SOULE.
THE TWO LARGEST TOWNS ARE
THE SEASIDE RESORT AREA OF
SAN SEBASTIAN AND BILBAO,
ONCE AN ANCIENT PORT
BUT NOW A THRIVING
INDUSTRIAL CENTER.
WITH A POPULATION OF AROUND
TWO AND A HALF MILLION,
85% OF THE BASQUES
LIVE IN SPAIN
WITH THE
REST IN FRANCE.
THE ORIGINS OF THE BASQUE
PEOPLE ARE LOST IN TIME.
WHAT IS KNOWN, HOWEVER,
IS THAT THEY'VE OCCUPIED
THEIR PRESENT TERRITORY
SINCE BEFORE THE ROMANS
STARTED CONQUERING
THE REST OF EUROPE.
THEY HAVE THEIR OWN
LANGUAGE, EUSKARA,
WHICH HAS NO RECOGNIZABLE
LINK WITH ANY OTHER
KNOWN LANGUAGE AND THEY'RE
DETERMINED TO PRESERVE IT.
DOWN THROUGH
THE CENTURIES
THE BASQUES HAVE DEVELOPED
A UNIQUE CULTURE,
OWING NOTHING TO
EITHER SPAIN OR FRANCE.
THIS IS REFLECTED IN
THEIR NATIONAL DRESS,
THEIR COOKING, THEIR
MUSIC, THEIR LITERATURE,
AND THEIR RELIGION.
THEY REMAIN A FIERCELY
INDEPENDENT PEOPLE,
RESISTING INVASION ATTEMPTS
FROM ROMANS TO MOORS.
THIS ENABLED THE BASQUES
TO BE MORE OR LESS
SELF-GOVERNING UNTIL THE
LATTER PART OF THE 19TH
CENTURY WHEN, FOLLOWING
A PERIOD OF CIVIL WAR,
THE SPANISH DECIDED TO
MAKE THE BASQUE REGION
A PART OF SPAIN.
SPAIN REMAINED NEUTRAL
DURING WWI BUT BY 1936
THE COUNTRY WAS DRIFTING,
ONCE AGAIN, TOWARDS
CIVIL WAR AS THE SPANISH
REPUBLIC, ESTABLISHED
JUST FIVE YEARS EARLIER,
FOUND ITSELF UP AGAINST
THE FORCES OF FASCISM LED BY
GENERAL FRANCISCO FRANCO.
DURING THE WAR THE BASQUE
PROVINCES OF ALAVA
AND NAVARRA SIDE WITH
FRANCO WHILE GUIPUZCOA
AND VIZCAYA JOIN FORCES
WITH THE REPUBLICANS.
IN OCTOBER 1936 THE
BASQUE REGION IS
DECLARED INDEPENDENT
BY THE REPUBLIC.
THIS INFURIATES FRANCO
WHO IS NOW DETERMINED
TO STAMP OUT
BASQUE NATIONALISM.
IN A CYNICAL EXAMPLE OF
EUROPEAN POWER POLITICS,
THE SPANISH CIVIL WAR
IS EXPLOITED BY BOTH
ADOLF HITLER,
CHANCELLOR OF GERMANY,
AND BENITO MUSSOLINI,
THE ITALIAN DICTATOR,
AS THEY SHIP IN TROOPS AND
EQUIPMENT TO AID FRANCO.
FACED WITH SUCH
OVERWHELMING ODDS,
THE REPUBLICANS
QUICKLY LOSE GROUND.
IN APRIL 1937,
GERMAN PLANES BOMB
THE BASQUE TOWN
OF GUERNICA.
AND IN JUNE, BILBAO, THE
LAST BASQUE STRONGHOLD,
FALLS TO
FRANCO'S FORCES.
THE BASQUE GOVERNMENT
NOW GOES INTO EXILE -
FIRST TO BARCELONA
AND THEN TO FRANCE.
IN APRIL 1939, HAVING WON
THE CIVIL WAR AT A COST OF
MORE THAN A MILLION
LIVES, A RUINED ECONOMY,
AND A LASTING
LEGACY OF HATRED,
FRANCO STARTS
TAKING HIS REVENGE
ON THE BASQUES WHO SIDED
WITH THE REPUBLICANS.
AT THE SAME TIME HE ALLOWS
THE TWO PROVINCES WHO HAD
SUPPORTED HIM TO RETAIN
A DEGREE OF AUTONOMY.
BUT IN DEALING
WITH WHAT HE CALLS
THE "TRAITOR PROVINCES",
HE EXECUTES THOUSANDS
AND CONDEMNS MANY
MORE TO LABOR CAMPS
WHERE THEY PERISH IN
THE HARSH CONDITIONS.
FRANCO ALSO CRACKS DOWN
HARD ON THE BASQUE CULTURE
AND THE BASQUE
PEOPLE THEMSELVES.
THEY'RE FORBIDDEN TO USE
THEIR LANGUAGE IN PUBLIC
OR FLY THE BASQUE
NATIONAL FLAG.
PROPERTY IS CONFISCATED,
CLERICS ARE DISMISSED,
AND INTELLECTUALS AND
POLITICIANS WHO SPEAK OUT
AGAINST FRANCO ARE
THROWN INTO JAIL,
MANY OF THEM
UNDERGOING TORTURE.
BUT IF THE SPANISH
DICTATOR THINKS THIS
WILL SOLVE WHAT HE AND HIS
SENIOR COHORTS REGARD AS
"THE BASQUE PROBLEM",
HE COULDN'T HAVE
BEEN MORE WRONG.
ALL HIS BRUTALITY SERVES
IS TO HARDEN THE RESOLVE
OF THE BASQUES, WHO STOOD
AGAINST HIM EVEN MORE.
FOLLOWING THE CIVIL WAR,
AROUND 150,000 BASQUES
HAD FLED INTO EXILE.
MANY OF THEM TO FRANCE
WHERE THEY REMAIN
UNTIL THE START OF
WWII IN SEPTEMBER 1939
WHEN SOME OF THEM
MOVE EITHER TO ENGLAND
OR VARIOUS SOUTH
AMERICAN COUNTRIES.
HOWEVER, A LARGE NUMBER
OF BASQUES CHOOSE TO STAY
IN FRANCE WHERE THEY
JOIN THE FRENCH RESISTANCE
AGAINST
NAZI OCCUPATION.
LATER, OTHERS FORM A
SPECIAL BASQUE BATTALION
KNOWN AS GERNIKA
AND THEY JOIN FORCES
WITH THE ALLIES IN
DRIVING THE GERMANS BACK
THROUGH FRANCE FOLLOWING
D-DAY ON JUNE 6, 1944.
AT THE END OF THE WAR
IN EUROPE IN MAY 1945,
SEVERAL HUNDRED OF
THESE EXPERIENCED
GERNIKA VETERANS
SLIP BACK INTO SPAIN,
WHICH HAD REMAINED
NEUTRAL THROUGHOUT,
AND HIDE OUT IN
THE BASQUE MOUNTAINS.
NOW THE WAR IS OVER
THEY'RE BACK ON THE
OLD AGENDA - ENDING
SPAIN'S DOMINATION
OVER THE BASQUES.
SPAIN'S DICTATOR,
GENERAL FRANCO,
IS DETERMINED
NOT TO GIVE WAY
TO THE BASQUE INSURGENCE
CLAMORING FOR INDEPENDENCE
AND SENDS IN HIS TROOPS
TO ROOT THEM OUT.
BUT HAVING HONED THEIR
SKILLS ON THE BATTLEFIELDS
OF EUROPE, THE BASQUES
NOW HAVE THE ABILITY
TO MOUNT A HIGHLY EFFECTIVE
GUERILLA CAMPAIGN.
BASQUE RESISTANCE TO
FRANCO GROWS DAILY.
THE BASQUE GOVERNMENT
IS RESTORED IN PARIS
AND THE BASQUE NATIONALIST
PARTY, THE PNV,
IS STEADILY
REBUILDING ITSELF.
IN MAY 1947 THERE'S
A GENERAL STRIKE
IN THE INDUSTRIAL
CITY OF BILBAO.
IT REPRESENTS THE FIRST
OPEN CHALLENGE TO FRANCO'S
REPRESSIVE REGIME
SINCE THE CIVIL WAR.
FRANCO REACTS
WITH TYPICAL FURY,
DISMISSING 15,000
WORKERS FROM THEIR JOBS
AND JAILING
HUNDREDS OF OTHERS.
DESPITE THIS, MANY BASQUES
CONSIDERED THE STRIKE
A SUCCESS AND OVER
THE NEXT FOUR YEARS
A NUMBER OF SIMILAR
ACTIONS TAKE PLACE
WITH HEAVILY ARMED POLICE
TRYING TO MAINTAIN ORDER.
WITH EACH STRIKE OR
DEMONSTRATION AGAINST
HIS AUTHORITY, FRANCO
BECOMES EVER MORE FURIOUS.
HE'S DETERMINED TO CRUSH
BASQUE NATIONALISM
ONCE AND FOR ALL.
HE NOW BRINGS SO MUCH
PRESSURE TO BEAR THAT MUCH
OF THE BASQUE NETWORK
OPERATING IN SPAIN IS LEFT
IN RUINS AS ITS MEMBERS
ARE ARRESTED, FLEE ABROAD,
OR RETREAT ONCE MORE
TO THE MOUNTAINS.
BUT THEIR DESIRE
FOR INDEPENDENCE
IS VIRTUALLY
UNQUENCHABLE.
HOWEVER, IT WILL NOT BE
UNTIL JULY 31, 1959,
THE 20TH YEAR OF FRANCO'S
IRON RULE, THAT A GROUP OF
YOUNG MEN AND WOMEN GET
TOGETHER IN THE BASQUE
COUNTRY AND FORM AN ARMED
REVOLUTION MOVEMENT.
THEY'RE DETERMINED
TO WIN SELF GOVERNMENT
FOR THEIR HOMELAND.
THE GROUP IS KNOWN AS ETA
AND IT WILL SOON BECOME
ONE OF THE MOST NOTORIOUS
TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS
IN EUROPE.
IT'S NOT LONG BEFORE ETA
IS ATTRACTING A GREAT DEAL
OF ATTENTION, NOT JUST
FROM THE WARY SPANISH
AUTHORITIES BUT ALSO FROM
THOUSANDS OF ORDINARY
BASQUE CITIZENS WHO
ENTHUSIASTICALLY SUPPORT
THEIR FIGHT FOR
INDEPENDENCE.
THE POLICE SOON CRACK
DOWN ON THE FLEDGLING
ORGANIZATION AND
START MAKING ARRESTS.
SEVERAL OF ETA'S
LEADING OPERATIVES
NOW FLEE ACROSS THE
MOUNTAINS INTO FRANCE.
ONCE OVER THE BORDER
THEY'RE RECEIVED AS HEROES
BY THE FRENCH FOR WHAT'S
SEEN AS THEIR COURAGEOUS
STAND AGAINST FRANCO'S
FASCIST REGIME.
WITH MANY OF THEIR
COMPANIONS LANGUISHING
IN SPANISH JAILS, THE
GROUP, NOW HIDING OUT
IN BOTH FRANCE
AND SPAIN,
UNDERGOES A RIGOROUS
TRAINING PROGRAM
AS THEY BEGIN TO PLAN
A SERIES OF ATTACKS
THAT WILL PROVE THEY'RE
STILL VERY MUCH IN BUSINESS.
THEY ALSO EMBARK ON A
SPREE OF ROBBERIES,
RAISING MONEY TO BUY THE
WEAPONS, EXPLOSIVES AND
VEHICLES THEY NEED IN
THEIR WAR OF TERROR
AGAINST THE SPANISH
AUTHORITIES.
AS THE POLICE HUNT
FOR THEM INTENSIFIES,
ETA'S CORE MEMBERS
NOW SET UP SECRET BASES
HIDDEN DEEP IN THE
REMOTE BASQUE HILLS.
HERE THEY FEEL SAFE
KNOWING THAT THEIR FELLOW
COUNTRYMEN WILL GIVE
THEM PLENTY OF WARNING
IF THE POLICE APPEAR
TO BE GETTING TOO CLOSE.
ETA REGARDS THE POLICE
AS THE UNACCEPTABLE FACE
OF SPANISH REPRESSION AND
PUTS THEM TOP OF THE
HIT LIST DURING THEIR
CAMPAIGN OF TERROR
AGAINST THE STATE.
THE POLICE AND THE
COUNTRY'S CIVIL GUARD
REACT WITH PREDICTABLE
FURY, BREAKING UP PRO-ETA
DEMONSTRATIONS WITH
MAXIMUM FORCE.
HOWEVER, MANY ORDINARY
BASQUES ABHOR THE VIOLENCE.
AS CLAIR GETTEGO, A
TEACHER POINTED OUT,
ALL THEY WANT TO
DO IS LIVE IN PEACE
WITH THEIR
SPANISH NEIGHBORS.
WE WANT TO
BE INDEPENDENT.
ALL WE WANT IS TO
AND THEN, IF WE WERE
INDEPENDENT, I'M SURE
SHOULD BE VERY FRIENDLY
TO SPANISH PEOPLE.
WE SHOULD.
WE HAVE NOTHING
AGAINST THEM. I MEAN,
AS LONG AS THEY DON'T
HAVE NOTHING AGAINST US.
>>BUT AS GENERAL FRANCO
URGES THE AUTHORITIES TO
CRACK DOWN EVEN HARDER
ON PEOPLE TAKING TO THE
STREETS, THE BASQUE
DREAM OF INDEPENDENCE
SEEMS EVER MORE REMOTE.
AND WHEN, ON DECEMBER 20,
1973, SPANISH PRIME MINISTER
ADMIRAL LUIS CARRERO
BLANCO IS BLOWN TO BITS
IN HIS CAR ALONG WITH HIS
DRIVER AND BODYGUARD,
FRANCO IS DOUBLY
DETERMINED TO CRUSH
THE RESISTANCE
TO HIS REGIME.
ETA'S CAMPAIGN OF VIOLENCE
CONTINUED THROUGHOUT
THE FOLLOWING YEAR
WITH A SERIES OF BOMBS,
INCLUDING ONE IN A
MADRID BAR FREQUENTED BY
SECURITY OFFICERS, AND
INDIVIDUAL ASSASSINATIONS.
IN ADDITION THEY ORGANIZE
POLITICAL PRISONERS'
HUNGER STRIKES AND
INITIATE INDUSTRIAL UNREST
THROUGHOUT THE
BASQUE REGION.
AND THEY NEVER LET UP
ON THEIR MAIN DEMAND:
COMPLETE FREEDOM
FOR THE BASQUES
AND THE RIGHT TO
GOVERN THEMSELVES.
BUT AS LONG AS
FRANCO IS IN POWER
THE MORE REALISTIC
AMONG THEM KNOW
SELF DETERMINATION
IS A FORLORN HOPE.
IN THE SPRING OF 1975,
ETA ASSASSINATE
A NUMBER OF
POLICE OFFICERS.
ON APRIL 25TH FRANCO
RETALIATES BY SUSPENDING
THE CONSTITUTION IN THE
BASQUE PROVINCES OF
VIZCAYA AND GUIPUZCOA
AND IMPOSING MARTIAL LAW,
OR AS IT WAS KNOWN,
A STATE OF EXCEPTION.
IN THE FOLLOWING WEEKS
POLICE ROUND UP
AND IMPRISON 3,000
BASQUE CITIZENS.
ETA RESPONDS IN KIND.
PANIC NOW BEGINS TO SPREAD
IN SPAIN AS NO ONE KNOWS
WHERE THE TERRORISTS
WOULD STRIKE NEXT.
FRANCO LIFTED HIS MARTIAL
LAW DECREE ON JULY 25,
BUT AS THIS DID NOTHING
TO LESSEN THE VIOLENCE
HE RE-IMPOSED IT
A MONTH LATER.
THEN, ON SEPTEMBER THE
26TH, FIVE TERRORISTS,
TWO OF WHOM WERE ETA
MEMBERS, ANGEL OTAEGUI
AND JUAN PAREDES MANOT,
KNOWN AS "TXIQUI",
WERE EXECUTED
BY FIRING SQUAD
AFTER BEING
CONVICTED OF MURDER.
THIS CAUSED OUTRAGE AND
THOUSANDS OF PROTESTERS
TOOK TO THE STREETS; BUT
IT HAD NO EFFECT ON FRANCO
AND HE GAVE THE GO AHEAD
FOR 15 OTHER ETA MEMBERS
TO FACE TRIAL INCLUDING
TWO WHO HAD TAKEN PART
IN THE ASSASSINATION
OF THE PRIME MINISTER,
CARRERO BLANCO,
TWO YEARS EARLIER.
AGAIN ETA ESCALATES
THE VIOLENCE,
GOING AFTER THE
POLICE IN PARTICULAR.
INEVITABLY CIVILIANS GET
CAUGHT UP IN THE CROSSFIRE.
BY NOW ETA IS ATTRACTING
FUNDS AND WEAPONS FROM
STATES LIKE CUBA, LIBYA,
RUSSIA AND CZECHOSLOVAKIA.
ETA IS ALSO KNOWN TO HAVE
HAD SUPPORTIVE LINKS
WITH THE PROVISIONAL
IRA, NOW WAGING ITS OWN
WAR OF TERROR ON THE
BRITISH AUTHORITIES.
ON NOVEMBER 20, 1975, MUCH
TO THE DELIGHT OF ETA,
FRANCO DIES FROM
HEART FAILURE.
AGED 82, HE HAD KEPT
AN IRON GRIP ON SPAIN
FOR THE LAST 39 YEARS,
LONGER THAN ANY OTHER
EUROPEAN DICTATOR.
ON NOVEMBER THE 22ND, JUST
TWO DAYS AFTER THE DEATH
OF GENERAL FRANCO, PRINCE
JUAN CARLOS IS SWORN IN
AS KING OF SPAIN.
THE NEXT DAY HE JOINED
THOUSANDS OF HIS
FELLOW CITIZENS FOR
FRANCO'S FUNERAL.
HE WAS ALREADY WELL
USED TO GOVERNMENT,
HAVING BEEN ACTING
HEAD OF STATE
DURING FRANCO'S EARLIER
PERIOD OF ILLNESS.
THEN ON OCTOBER 30, 1975,
FRANCO, KNOWING HE DIDN'T
HAVE MUCH LONGER TO LIVE,
GIVES HIM FULL CONTROL.
FOLLOWING FRANCO'S DEATH,
THE GOVERNMENT'S ATTITUDE
TOWARDS THE BASQUES
RELAXED A LITTLE AND THEY
BEGAN TO ALLOW THE REGION
A DEGREE OF AUTONOMY.
ETA RESPONDS BY CUTTING BACK
ON ITS TERROR CAMPAIGN,
WAITING TO SEE HOW THE
SITUATION DEVELOPS.
BUT IN THEIR EYES PROGRESS
TOWARDS FULL INDEPENDENCE
IS PAINFULLY SLOW, AND BY
SPRING 1978, FRUSTRATED
AND ANGRY, THEY FALL BACK
ON THEIR VIOLENT WAYS.
MEANWHILE ETA'S POLITICAL
WING, THE BATASUNA PARTY,
WHICH HAS THE SUPPORT
OF AROUND 20%
OF THE BASQUE PEOPLE,
IS TRYING TO ACHIEVE
A PEACEFUL SETTLEMENT.
BUT AS ONE TIME ETA
SUPPORTER JUAN AKANEIRA
REMARKED IN 1978, IT
SEEMS A LONG TIME COMING.
FOR US, THE END OF THE
DICTATORSHIP, THE DEATH
OF FRANCO, HASN'T MEANT
TO THE BASQUE COUNTRY
ANY PROGRESSIVE ADVANCE
AND WE ARE STILL LIVING
IN A SIMILAR TO
DICTATORSHIP SYSTEM.
WE THINK THAT TO
SPEAK OF DEMOCRACY
IN THE BASQUE COUNTRY
THERE HAS TO BE
A BREAK WITH THE
PAST DICTATORSHIP.
AND FOR US THAT MEANS
THAT OUR POLITICAL PROGRAM
MUST BE ACCEPTED BY
THE CENTRAL GOVERNMENT,
BY THE SPANISH ARMY,
WHICH IS THE SAME THAT
BEGAN THE CIVIL WAR IN
1936 AND IS STILL IN POWER.
>>LATER IN THE YEAR,
HOWEVER, SPAIN'S NEW
FLEDGLING DEMOCRATIC
GOVERNMENT AGREES TO
MANY OF ETA'S DEMANDS,
INCLUDING GIVING THE
BASQUES THEIR OWN
PARLIAMENT AND LIFTING
FRANCO'S BAN ON MANY
OF THEIR TRADITIONAL
CUSTOMS AND PRACTICES.
AN AMNESTY IS GRANTED
TO ALL ETA PRISONERS
HELD IN SPANISH JAILS.
BUT EVEN THOUGH IT'S A
STEP IN THE RIGHT DIRECTION,
THE CONCESSIONS
ARE NOT NEARLY ENOUGH
FOR ETA'S HARDLINERS.
THEY WANT NOTHING LESS
THAN FULL INDEPENDENCE
AND VOW TO CONTINUE
WITH THE VIOLENCE
UNTIL THE SPANISH
GOVERNMENT GIVES IN.
BUT THE GOVERNMENT
HAD ALWAYS MAINTAINED
IT WOULD NEVER
TALK TO ETA UNLESS
AND UNTIL THEY
RENOUNCE VIOLENCE.
THE DEATH TOLL BEGINS
TO RISE MORE STEEPLY
THAN AT ANY OTHER
TIME IN ETA'S HISTORY.
BUT NOW THE VICTIMS
ARE NOT JUST POLICE
OR MEMBERS OF
THE CIVIL GUARD,
INNOCENT MEMBERS
OF THE PUBLIC
GET CAUGHT UP
IN THE VIOLENCE
AS THE TERRORISTS
ATTEMPT TO SHOOT
AND BOMB THEIR WAY
TO A SETTLEMENT.
THERE IS NO REAL PATTERN
TO THE ATTACKS; MOST OCCUR
IN THE BASQUE PROVINCES
OF GUIPUZCOA AND VIZCAYA.
SPAIN ITSELF GETS OFF
RELATIVELY LIGHTLY
AS ETA CONCENTRATES
MAINLY ON HITTING TARGETS
IN THE CAPITAL, MADRID,
AND OCCASIONALLY
THE CITY OF
LOGRONO IN THE NORTH.
BUT NOW A SECRET SPANISH
COMMANDO GROUP KNOWN AS GAL,
GRUPOS ANTITERRORISTAS
DE LIBERACION,
DECIDES TO TAKE THE
FIGHT BACK TO ETA
IN AN ASSASSINATION
PROGRAM OF THEIR OWN.
A GREAT MANY ETA
AND EX-ETA MEMBERS
LIVE IN FRANCE, JUST
ACROSS THE SPANISH BORDER.
ONE OF THEM IS JUAN OTEGI,
A FURNITURE MAKER
BUT AT ONE TIME ACTIVE
WITH ETA IN MADRID.
HE'S NOW SUSPECTED
OF BEING INVOLVED IN
SMUGGLING ARMS FROM FRANCE
INTO THE BASQUE REGION.
HE'S A PRIME
TARGET FOR GAL.
ON THE LATE AFTERNOON
OF AUGUST 2, 1985,
THEY SEND TWO MOTORCYCLE
HITMEN TO SHOOT HIM
AS HE DRIVES BACK TO
HIS HOME AFTER WORK.
OTEGI DOESN'T
STAND A CHANCE.
FATALLY WOUNDED, HE
VEERS OFF THE ROAD.
MEANWHILE HIS KILLERS
GET CLEAN AWAY.
A SHORT TIME LATER GAL
GOES AFTER MEMBERS OF ETA
LIVING IN THE FRENCH
CITY OF BAYONNE,
A SHORT DISTANCE FROM
THE SPANISH BORDER.
THEY KILL SIX AND WOUND
A GREAT MANY MORE.
MEANWHILE OTEGI IS
BURIED IN THE BASQUE TOWN
OF ORDIZIA, JUST ONE OF
EIGHTEEN ETA MEMBERS
MURDERED BY GAL HIT SQUADS
OVER A THREE YEAR PERIOD.
AS TIME PASSES THE
SPANISH AUTHORITIES
BECAME EXTREMELY
FRUSTRATED BY THE FACT
THAT ETA TERRORISTS
APPEARED TO BE LIVING
BEYOND THEIR
REACH IN FRANCE.
BUT IN 1992, IN A NEW
DEGREE OF COOPERATION,
FRENCH POLICE NOW PLACE
KNOWN LEADING ETA MEMBERS
ON THEIR SIDE OF THE BORDER
UNDER CLOSE SURVEILLANCE.
IT'S NOT LONG BEFORE THEY
START MAKING IMPORTANT
ARRESTS, LEAVING ETA
IN A STATE OF DISARRAY.
ETA MIGHT BE WEAKENED, BUT
AS TWO CAR BOMBS IN MADRID
SOON DEMONSTRATE, LEAVING
SIX SOLDIERS DEAD
AND DOZENS OF
CIVILIANS INJURED,
THE ORGANIZATION SEEMS
FAR FROM FINISHED.
DESPITE THIS, SPAIN'S
SECURITY MINISTER, RAFAEL
VERA, REMAINS CONVINCED
THAT ETA IS A SPENT FORCE.
BUT ETA STILL WON'T
LET UP IN ITS DEMANDS
FOR COMPLETE BASQUE
AUTONOMY; AS FAR AS
THEY'RE CONCERNED,
THE FIGHT GOES ON.
MEANWHILE THE SPANISH
AUTHORITIES, ALTHOUGH
PREPARED TO HOLD TALKS
WITH ETA'S POLITICAL WING,
THE BATASUNA PARTY CONTINUE
TO TAKE A TOUGH LINE.
IN JULY 1997, ETA KIDNAPS
AND KILLS A PROMINENT
SPANISH POLITICIAN,
MIGUEL ANGEL BLANCO.
SIX MILLION
SPANISH CITIZENS
TAKE TO THE
STREETS IN PROTEST.
THE FOLLOWING YEAR ETA
ANNOUNCES A CEASEFIRE,
BUT IT DOESN'T LAST AND
THEY'RE SOON PLANTING BOMBS
AND HITTING
INDIVIDUALS AGAIN.
IN 2001, DESPERATE TO MAKE
MORE OF AN IMPACT ON THE
SPANISH AUTHORITIES, ETA
SAYS IT WILL NOW TARGET
THE VITAL TOURIST
INDUSTRY.
OVER THE NEXT COUPLE OF
YEARS BOMBS HIT HOTELS
IN THE POPULAR HOLIDAY
RESORTS OF BENIDORM
AND ALICANTE ON
THE COSTA BLANCA.
SPAIN REACTS BY ARRESTING
A GREAT MANY ETA LEADERS
AND IMPOSING A BAN ON
THEIR POLITICAL WING,
THE BATASUNA PARTY.
MEANWHILE THE ATTACKS FAIL
TO DETER THE TOURISTS AND
THEY CONTINUE TO FLOCK TO
SPAIN IN THEIR THOUSANDS,
PARTICULARLY
FROM THE U.K.
THEN ON MARCH 11, 2004,
A SERIES OF BOMBS
HIT FOUR CROWDED COMMUTER
TRAINS IN MADRID.
NEARLY 200 PEOPLE
DIE AND AROUND 1,800
ARE INJURED
IN THE BLASTS.
AT FIRST EVERYONE
BLAMES ETA,
BUT IT TURNS OUT
LATER TO HAVE BEEN
CARRIED OUT BY
ISLAMIST EXTREMISTS.
ON MARCH 22, 2006, ETA
DECLARES ANOTHER CEASEFIRE,
SWEARING THAT THIS TIME
IT WILL BE PERMANENT.
BUT LATER THAT YEAR
THEY CHANGE THEIR MIND
AND CALL IT OFF.
THEY MARK THIS WITH A
VENGEANCE ON DECEMBER 30,
2006, BY PLANTING A BOMB
IN A MULTI-STORY CAR PARK
AT MADRID'S
BARAJAS AIRPORT,
THE BUSIEST
IN THE COUNTRY.
THE MASSIVE EXPLOSION SENDS
A HUGE PLUME OF SMOKE
INTO THE AIR, WRECKS FIVE
FLOORS IN THE BUILDING,
KILLS TWO PEOPLE
AND INJURES ANOTHER 19.
SINCE IT CAME INTO
BEING IN 1959,
ETA HAS NEVER WAVERED
IN ITS DEMAND FOR
AN INDEPENDENT AND SELF
GOVERNING BASQUE STATE.
BUT AS TIME WENT BY
AND THE DEATH TOLL
STEADILY MOUNTED, ETA BEGAN
TO LOSE THE SUPPORT OF A
GREAT MANY ORDINARY BASQUE
CITIZENS WHO AGREED WITH
THE TERROR ORGANIZATION'S
AIMS BUT NOT ITS METHODS.
THEY'VE GROWN TIRED OF THE
SEEMINGLY NEVER ENDING
CYCLE OF VIOLENCE, AS PAUL
WILKINSON, PROFESSOR OF
INTERNATIONAL RELATIONS
AT ABERDEEN UNIVERSITY,
SEES ONLY TOO CLEARLY.
THE FACT IS THAT ETA IS
NOW ON A HIDING TO NOTHING.
THEY ARE
EFFECTIVELY ISOLATED
WITHIN THE
BASQUE COMMUNITY.
THEY CAN NO LONGER GO ROUND
WITH A COLLECTING BOX
AND EXPECT IT TO BE FILLED
BY WILLING BASQUE HANDS.
INDEED THERE HAVE BEEN
MASSIVE DEMONSTRATIONS,
AS YOU KNOW, AGAINST
TERRORISM IN THE HEART OF
THE BASQUE REGION.
AND THE OTHER POLITICAL
PARTIES ARE GENERALLY
TOTALLY OPPOSED TO
THE KIND OF VIOLENCE
THAT ETA HAS
BEEN USING.
>>DURING ITS LONG, BLOODY
CAMPAIGN ETA IS THOUGHT
TO HAVE KILLED AT
LEAST 800 PEOPLE.
BUT LIKE SO MANY
OTHER SIMILAR
TERRORIST ORGANIZATIONS
AROUND THE WORLD,
ETA HAS FOUND, MUCH
TO ITS OWN COST,
THAT IN THE LONG RUN
NOTHING IS TO BE GAINED
THROUGH THE BOMB
AND THE GUN.
WITH GOOD WILL
ON BOTH SIDES
THE FORCES OF TRUE
DEMOCRACY WILL ALWAYS
TRIUMPH OVER INDISCRIMINATE
VIOLENCE AND HATRED.